packagestats/README.md, before:

# Introduction
The `packagestats` package collects package utilization statistics on packages
loaded and attached using the `base::library` and `base::require` functions.
The package works by implementing `library` and `require` functions with identical
interfaces that appear in the search path of attached packages before the
`base` package so that the utilization statistics can be collected
transparently to the user.  The names of the packages and other identifying
information are logged and uniquely associated with the instance of the
R programming environment so that system administrators and developers can
study software utilization and prioritize development efforts.

# Installation
The installation of the package can be trivially installed with the use of
the `install.packages` function.  The package must be loaded as a default
package at startup, and options must be set to configure the logging
functionality.

So that users transparently use the `packagestats` functions, the `packagestats`
package must be loaded by default.  To accomplish this, the `Rprofile.site`
file containing the site profile should be modified to include `packagestats`
as a package under the `defaultPackages` option.  The following code
accomplishes this when placed in the site profile:

```
# Add packagestats to the list of default packages
p <- options("defaultPackages")
defaultPackages <- p$defaultPackages
defaultPackages <- c("packagestats", defaultpackages)
options("defaultPackages" = defaultPackages)
```

The package utilization information can be written to a CSV log file or
performed using the XALT utility.  Options for activating the statistics
collection, setting the logging method, and specifying other logging options
should be set in the `Rprofile.site` file common to all R installations.  All
package options should be set in the `Rprofile.site` file.  The
`package.stats.enabled` and `package.stats.method` options must be set to
enable/disable the logging and select the logging method, respectively.  If the
logging method is set to `csvfile`, then the `package.stats.logDirectory` must
be set to the the directory where the CSV log files are to be saved and the
`package.stats.logFilePrefix` option must also be set to a prefix string to be
added to the log file name.  The following example shows how to enable and configure
collection of package utilization using CSV log files:

```
# Enable the package statistics
options(package.stats.enabled = TRUE)
# Set the logging method to CSV files
options(package.stats.method = "csvfile")
# Set the directory for the session pacakge utilization log files 
options(package.stats.logDirectory = "/path/to/log/files")
# Set the prefix of each log file name
options(package.stats.logFilePrefix = "rpkgstats") 
```

The following information is currently saved in the CSV log file created for
each R session:
1. __ScriptFile__ the name of the R script file as returned by
   `commandArgs` under the `--file` option, or the empty string if the session
   is interactive
1. __RVersion__ the version of the R programming environment
1. __PackageName__ the name of the package loaded
1. __PackagePath__ the full path to the R package loaded
1. __PackageVersion__ the version of the package loaded
1. __UserLogin__ the user's login name as returned by `base::Sys.info`
1. __UserName__ the real name of the user as returned by `base::Sys.info`
1. __EffectiveUser__ the name of the effective user as returned by
   `base::Sys.info`

To utilize the XALT utility, `package.stats.method` should be set to `xalt` and
the `package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var`, `package.stats.xalt_dir_var`, and
`package.stats.xalt_exec_path` options should be set.  The
`package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var` option specifies the XALT environment variable
containing the UUID generated by XALT for the R session, the
`package.stats.xalt_dir_var` option specifies the XALT environment variable
containing the path to the XALT installation being used, and the
`package.stats.xalt_exec_path` option specifies the relative path starting from
the directory specified by the environment variable given by
`package.stats.xalt_dir_var` to the XALT executable utility for logging R
package utilization.

```
# Enable the package statistics
options(package.stats.enabled = TRUE)
# Set the logging method to use XALT
options(package.stats.method = "xalt")
# Set the XALT environment variable specifying the UUID of the R session
options(package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var = "XALT_RUN_UUID")
# Set the directory path to the XALT installation being used
options(package.stats.xalt_dir_var = "XALT_DIR")
# Set the relative path to the XALT package logging utility
options(package.stats.xalt_exec_path = "libexec/xalt_record_pkg")
```

A filter list option `package.stats.filter` should also be set to a vector of
strings specifying packages that are to be exempted from utilization tracking,
or `NULL` if none are to be exempted.  Also, packages loaded by default by the
R programming environment upon initialization, are not currently tracked by the 
`packagestats` package.  This is because those packages are loaded before
`packagestats`.  However, packages referenced using the `::` operator during
function calls cause logging of the associated package (if not a member of the
filter list) because that operator is overloaded to perform logging with
`packagestats`.

Commit message:

Improved documentation and modified the filename format of the csv log files to contain the user name and a time stamp.

packagestats/README.md, after:

# Introduction
The `packagestats` package collects package utilization statistics on packages
loaded and attached using the `base::library` and `base::require` functions.
The package works by implementing `library` and `require` functions with identical
interfaces that appear in the search path of attached packages before the
`base` package so that the utilization statistics can be collected
transparently to the user.  The names of the packages and other identifying
information are logged and uniquely associated with the instance of the
R programming environment so that system administrators and developers can
study software utilization and prioritize development efforts.

# Installation
The installation of the package can be trivially installed with the use of
the `install.packages` function.  The package must be loaded as a default
package at startup, and options must be set to configure the logging
functionality.

So that users transparently use the `packagestats` functions, the `packagestats`
package must be loaded by default.  To accomplish this, the `Rprofile.site`
file (usually found under the /etc directory of the R installation) containing
the site profile should be modified to include `packagestats` as a package
under the `defaultPackages` option.  The following code accomplishes this when
placed in the site profile:

```
# Add packagestats to the list of default packages
p <- options("defaultPackages")
defaultPackages <- p$defaultPackages
defaultPackages <- c("packagestats", defaultpackages)
options("defaultPackages" = defaultPackages)
```

The package utilization information can be written to a CSV log file or
performed using the XALT utility.  Options for activating the statistics
collection, setting the logging method, and specifying other logging options
should be set in the `Rprofile.site` file common to all R installations.  All
package options should be set in the `Rprofile.site` file.  The
`package.stats.enabled` and `package.stats.method` options must be set to
enable/disable the logging and select the logging method, respectively.  If the
logging method is set to `csvfile`, then the `package.stats.logDirectory` must
be set to the the directory where the CSV log files are to be saved and the
`package.stats.logFilePrefix` option must also be set to a prefix string to be
added to the log file name.  The log file name is in the form
`logFilePrefix_login_procesId_timeStamp` where `logFilePrefix` is as discussed
above, `login` is the user login ID, `processId` is the process ID of the R
session, and `timeStamp` is the system time converted to an integer using
`as.integer(Sys.time())`.  The following example shows how to enable and
configure collection of package utilization using CSV log files:

```
# Enable the package statistics
options(package.stats.enabled = TRUE)
# Set the logging method to CSV files
options(package.stats.method = "csvfile")
# Set the directory for the session pacakge utilization log files 
options(package.stats.logDirectory = "/path/to/log/files")
# Set the prefix of each log file name
options(package.stats.logFilePrefix = "rpkgstats") 
```

The following information is currently saved in the CSV log file created for
each R session:
1. __ScriptFile__ the name of the R script file as returned by
   `commandArgs` under the `--file` option, or the empty string if the session
   is interactive
1. __RVersion__ the version of the R programming environment
1. __PackageName__ the name of the package loaded
1. __PackagePath__ the full path to the R package loaded
1. __PackageVersion__ the version of the package loaded

The user login ID is not saved in the file, as it is already part of the log
file name.

To utilize the XALT utility, `package.stats.method` should be set to `xalt` and
the `package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var`, `package.stats.xalt_dir_var`, and
`package.stats.xalt_exec_path` options should be set.  The
`package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var` option specifies the XALT environment variable
containing the UUID generated by XALT for the R session, the
`package.stats.xalt_dir_var` option specifies the XALT environment variable
containing the path to the XALT installation being used, and the
`package.stats.xalt_exec_path` option specifies the relative path starting from
the directory specified by the environment variable given by
`package.stats.xalt_dir_var` to the XALT executable utility for logging R
package utilization.

```
# Enable the package statistics
options(package.stats.enabled = TRUE)
# Set the logging method to use XALT
options(package.stats.method = "xalt")
# Set the XALT environment variable specifying the UUID of the R session
options(package.stats.xalt_run_uuid_var = "XALT_RUN_UUID")
# Set the directory path to the XALT installation being used
options(package.stats.xalt_dir_var = "XALT_DIR")
# Set the relative path to the XALT package logging utility
options(package.stats.xalt_exec_path = "libexec/xalt_record_pkg")
```

A filter list option `package.stats.filter` should also be set to a vector of
strings specifying packages that are to be exempted from utilization tracking,
or `NULL` if none are to be exempted.  Also, to avoid tracking packages loaded
by default, the filter list should be composed of the `defaultPackages` option
list and any additional names of packages to be filtered; an example of how
to do this is given below.

```
# Filter default packages and any additional packages you want
# filtered.
options(package.stats.filter = c(defaultPackages, "base"))
```

Packages referenced using the `::` operator during
function calls also trigger logging of the associated package
(if not a member of the filter list) because that operator is overloaded to
perform logging with `packagestats`.
